This “mill.macro.wTemp_metadata” file was most recently updated on 2021-03-29 by Marney Pratt


-------------------
GENERAL INFORMATION
-------------------


1. Title of Dataset 

Mill River Macroinvertebrate and Daily Water Temperature Data for 2018-2019


2. Author Information


  Principal Investigator Contact Information
        Name: Marney Pratt
           Institution: Smith College
           Address: 44 College Ln, Northampton, MA 01063
           Email: mcpratt@smith.edu



3. Date of data collection (single date, range, approximate date) <dates in format YYYY-MM>

2018-05 to 2019-10


4. Geographic location of data collection (where was data collected?): 

Mill River in Northampton, MA  USA
GPS coordinates given below



5. Information about funding sources that supported the collection of the data:

Smith College Facilities Management funded summary salary for Marney Pratt and 
Summer Undergradate Research Fellowships awarded to 
Sasha Clapp and Lyric Williams in 2018
Andrew Turgeon and Samikshya Dhami in 2019

The Horner Fund funded a Summer Undergradate Research Fellowship for 
Renee Halloran in 2018
Sasha Clapp in 2019

The Smith College Department of Biological Sciences funded some of the materials and supplies in 
addition to Smith College Facilities Management

--------------------------
SHARING/ACCESS INFORMATION
-------------------------- 


1. Licenses/restrictions placed on the data:
No restrictions other than proper citation/attribution


2. Recommended citation for this metadata text file:

Pratt, MC.  2021.  Mill River macroinvertebrate and daily water temperature metadata for 2018-2019.  Smith College, Northampton, MA.

3. Recommended citation for the data:

Pratt, MC.  2021.  Mill River macroinvertebrate and daily water temperature data for 2018-2019.  Smith College, Northampton, MA.



---------------------
DATA & FILE OVERVIEW
---------------------


1. File List
   A. Filename: mill.macro.wTemp.csv       
      Short description:        

Each row shows the data from one type of organism found from a site on the same day.  The data contains all the organisms found for the 
2018-2019 sampling for the upstream and downstream riffles in the Mill River.  The worms and midges were identified down to the lowest level 
possible with the keys available in the summer only. 
The daily water temperature values (max, min, mean) from the Lamont Bridge Monitoring Station are also included for each day macroinvertebrates were sampled.


--------------------------
METHODOLOGICAL INFORMATION
--------------------------


1. Description of methods used for collection/generation of data: 
<Include links or references to publications or other documentation containing experimental design or protocols used in data collection>

Methods: Investigators sampled several quadrats (usually 10) in each site on each date.  For each 50 cm x 50 cm quadrat

Aquatic macroinvertebrates were sampled from riffle habitats (areas with a rocky bottom, shallow depth, rippled water surface, and relatively fast water flow) 
by kick-sampling using D-nets (LaMotte D-net, 0.3m base opening & 500 micron mesh).  Nets were placed downstream with the opening facing upstream.  
A quadrat was placed in front of the net, the area sampled was 0.5 m x 0.5m.  


Larger rocks were picked up and any organisms found on the rocks were picked off and placed in a tub of river water.
Once all larger rocks were cleaned off and placed outside of the quadrat, the substratum was disturbed by shuffling and kicking an investigator's boots on the 
bottom of the river for 30 seconds to 1 minute making sure that the D-net caught anything disturbed by the kicking. 
The contents of the net were rinsed into the tub of water.  
This process was repeated 8-11 times per site, and all samples from a site were either joined into one composite sample (Fall 2018) or kept separate by microhabitat (Summer 2018, Fall & Summer 2019).  


In each location (upstream and downstream of Paradise Pond) we sampled 5 microhabitats.  We usually sampled 2 quadrats in each microhabitat for a total of 10 quadrats sampled in a location on a particular day.  

 
After collecting in the field, samples were taken back to the lab and sorted into categories (mostly at the order or family level) and then preserved in 
70% ethyl alcohol.  Later, each organism was identified to the lowest level possible (down to genus for most things, species for some, and higher taxonomic 
levels for some difficult to identify organisms such as worms and midges in the fall sampling times).

Note that because of heavy rains in Fall 2018, sampling was very difficult.  The 3rd downstream sample did not sample the sponge microhabitat (DSP) so there were only 8 quadrats taken for that sample, while 11 quadrats were taken in the 3rd upstream sample.



2. Describe any quality-assurance procedures performed on the data:
Whenever possible, identifications were checked by Marney Pratt to ensure consistency.  Data files were checked by Marney Pratt for errors in entry.

3. People involved with sample collection, processing, analysis and/or submission:

Investigators included:
Marney Pratt
Smith College Bio 131 students




-----------------------------------------
DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: mill.macro.wTemp.csv
-----------------------------------------


1. Variable List

siteID: Identification of the sampling river.  In this case, all samples were taken in the Mill River as indicated by the code MILL

date: sampling date in mm/dd/yyyy format 
	dates are all given in month/day/year (mm/dd/yyyy) format in the .csv file but usually given as yyyy-mm-dd when imported in R

year: sampling year

startTime.UTC: the time in hours:minutes:seconds in the Universal Time Coordinated (UTC) time zone that sampling was started

season: sampling season (Summer or Fall)

sampleTime: sampling time. Each sampling time is a combition of the season and year, for example Fall 2018 or Summer 2019

location: location in the river - Upstream or Downstream of Paradise Pond
	Coordinates estimated with Google Earth.
	https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/112FTHi84gQDcd_78vneF7nzcgPe0D2qoUNOyF4ZxU1M/edit?usp=sharing

	Upstream = This site is located in the Mill River upstream of the Paradise Pond impoundment.  The trail used to get to the river is 
	Just off of Federal St in Northampton, MA.  The coordinates for the center of the area of the river sampled that is 
	"downstream of the bend" (the bend is the bend in the river where there is a high retaining wall on one side and the water runs 
	fast and deep): 
		UR "downstream of the bend" 42degrees19'09"N  72degrees39'17"W  226m in elevation
		UR "upstream of the bend"   42degrees19'17"N  72degrees39'12"W  226m in elevation

	Downstream = This site is located just downstream of the Paradise Pond Dam and Lamont Bridge in the Mill River.  
	The center of the area of the river sampled in is around:  42degrees18'53"N  72degrees38'27"W  150m in elevation
	
	Both sites were fast flowing, relatively shallow, riffles with mostly rocky substrate mixed with more or less sand
	The upstream site is fairly sandy "downstream of the bend" but we tried to sample in the rockier areas


habitatType: the type of habitat - which is Riffle for all the samples in this dataset (but kept here to make it clear when comparing with other datasets)

samplerType: the type of sampler used to take the sample, in this case all samples were taken with a D-net (LaMotte D-net, 0.3m base opening & 500 micron mesh)

sampleID: unique identification code for each sample.
	example: 01URSU18.UM - first two numbers are the sample number, 
	the next two letters are for the site (UR = upstream riffle, DR = downstream riffle), 
	the next two letters are for the season (SU = summer, FA = Fall), 
	and the last two numbers are for the year (18 = 2018, 19 = 2019).  
	The letters after the period indicate the microhabitat or NA if the microhabitat is unknown

	
	See the map of each habitat for locations including the microhabitats within the sampling area where samples were taken. 		https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/112FTHi84gQDcd_78vneF7nzcgPe0D2qoUNOyF4ZxU1M/edit?usp=sharing

	DSR - Downstream slow rocky (on the far side of the river (closer to the athletic fields), just downstream of some larger rocks where the flow is 
	slower and there are some large rocks)
	DSP - Downstream sponge area (in the middle of the river, shallow, fast flow, lots of sponges present)
	DFR - Downstream fast rocky (on the far side of the river (closer to the athletic fields), just upstream of some larger rocks where the flow is faster 
	and there are some large rocks)
	DM - Downstream middle (in the middle of the river, moderate flow, just downstream of the sponge area, lots of small and medium sized rocks)
	DSH - Downstream shady (on the far side of the river (closer to the athletic fields), in a very fast flow area and very shaded because right below a 
	tree, further upstream than DFR)

	USR - Upstream slow rocky (on the close side of the river (closer to the path and the side with the retaining wall, "downstream of the bend"), 
	just downstream of some larger rocks where the flow is slower and there are some large rocks)
	UFR - Upstream fast rocky (on the close side of the river (closer to the path and the side with the retaining wall, "downstream of the bend"), 
	just upstream of some larger rocks where the flow is faster and there are some large rocks)
	UM - Upstream middle (in the middle of the river near some larger rocks, moderate flow, "downstream of the bend", lots of smallsized rocks)
	USH - Upstream shady (on the far side of the river ("upstream of the bend", further from the path we come in on), in a fast flow area and shaded 
	because right below a tree)
	USU - Upstream sunny (on the far side of the river ("upstream of the bend", further from the path we come in on), in a realtively fast flow area 
	just downstream of USH that is sunnier        


organism_aggr: the unique name for each organism aggregated for some organisms.	
	Some species are aggregated into a genus (especially a lot of the mayflies, stoneflies, and caddisflies), family (midges), or class (segmented worms)

acceptedTaxonID: the identification code for each taxon taken from NEON (https://data.neonscience.org/taxonomic-lists)

number: number of organisms of that type for that sample on that day


benthicArea: benthic area in meters squared. Calculated as the area of a 0.25 meter squared quadrat times the number of quadrats.

invDens: invertebrate density in number per meter squared. Calculated as the number of a particular organism divided by the benthic area that the organism was sampled in.

acceptedTaxonID: this is a unique identification code for each taxon based on codes from NEON: 
	https://data.neonscience.org/data-api/endpoints/taxonomy/

tolerance: tolerance for the organism of that type
	The tolerance is the tolerance to organic pollution used to calculate the Hilsenhof Biotic Index.  Most tolerance values used were
	taken from the following resources
	
	Stream Biomonitoring Unit Staff.  2012. Standard operating Procedure: Biological monitoring of surface waters in New York State.  
	New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Division of Water.  Albany, NY.
	
	Aquatic Bioassessment Laboratory. 2003. List of California macroinvertebrate taxa and standard taxonomic effort. 
	California Department of Fish and Game. Rancho Cordova, CA.
	https://www.safit.org/Docs/CABW_std_taxonomic_effort.pdf

FFG: Primary functional feeding group of that organism

	cf - filtering collector 	dominant food: filter feeders or suspension feeders that eat decomposing fine particular matter (FPOM) 
	cg - gathering collector 	dominant food: gathers or deposit feeds on decomposing fine particular matter (FPOM) (includes surface film feeders)
	om - omnivore dominant food: eats a variety of things including plant, animal, and detritus	
	prc - piercer  dominant food: eats by piercing its prey.  
	prd - predator	dominant food: eats living animal tissue.  Often ingests whole or part of another animal
	scr - scraper	 dominant food: scrapes periphyton of surfaces (periphyton = algae and associated material attached to rocks and other substrata)
	sh - shredders 	dominant food: herbivore variety chew and mines live plant material, detritivore variety chews, bores, or gouges decomposing vascular plant 	tissue including wood (course particulate organic matter = CPOM)


wTemp.max: the daily maximum temperature in Celcius as measured at the Lamont Bridge monitoring station
	http://pond.smith.edu/index.html

wTemp.min: the daily minimum temperature in Celcius as measured at the Lamont Bridge monitoring station
	http://pond.smith.edu/index.html

wTemp.mean: the daily mean temperature in Celcius as measured at the Lamont Bridge monitoring station
	http://pond.smith.edu/index.html   
      

2. Missing data codes:
        Code/symbol     Definition
	NA        	Not Available
        
3. Specialized formats of other abbreviations used
dates are all given in month/day/year (mm/dd/yyyy) format in the .csv file but usually given as yyyy-mm-dd when imported in R


