This “mcra_metadata” file was most recently updated on 2021-04-07 by Marney Pratt


-------------------
GENERAL INFORMATION
-------------------

Data were downloaded from NEON

McRae Creek (MCRA) data see: https://www.neonscience.org/field-sites/mcra

Macroinvertebrate Data see: https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP1.20120.001


-----------------------------------------
DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: mcra.macro.csv
-----------------------------------------


1. Variable List

siteID: Identification of the sampling river.  MCRA = McRae Creek

date: sampling date in mm/dd/yyyy format 
	dates are all given in month/day/year (mm/dd/yyyy) format in the .csv file but usually given as yyyy-mm-dd when imported in R

year: sampling year

startTime.UTC: the time in hours:minutes:seconds in the Universal Time Coordinated (UTC) time zone that sampling was started

season: sampling season (Spring, Summer or Fall)

sampleTime: sampling time. Each sampling time is a combition of the season and year, for example Fall 2018 or Summer 2019

habitatType: the type of habitat - which is riffle, pool, or stepPool

samplerType: the type of sampler used to take the sample, 
	see more information from NEON.DOC.003046vE (https://data.neonscience.org/api/v0/documents/NEON.DOC.003046vE)

		
	surber - "Surber sampler: Benthic sampler for flowing waters. A standard Surber sampler consists of a 30 cm x 30 cm frame and a long 243 mm Nitex mesh net that collects organisms (Figure 19)." 

	hess - 	"Hess sampler: Benthic sampler for gravel-bottomed streams (Figure 27). Sampler consists of a stainless steel drum fitted with a flow-through collection net. The drum is 33 cm in diameter by 40 cm high, with a 243 mm Nitex mesh net."



sampleID: unique identification code for each sample.
	

organism_aggr: the unique name for each organism aggregated for some organisms.	
	Some species are aggregated into a genus (especially a lot of the mayflies, stoneflies, and caddisflies), family (midges), or class (segmented worms)

acceptedTaxonID: the identification code for each taxon taken from NEON (https://data.neonscience.org/taxonomic-lists)

number: number of organisms of that type for that sample on that day


benthicArea: benthic area in meters squared. Calculated as the area of a 0.25 meter squared quadrat times the number of quadrats.

invDens: invertebrate density in number per meter squared. Calculated as the number of a particular organism divided by the benthic area that the organism was sampled in.

acceptedTaxonID: this is a unique identification code for each taxon based on codes from NEON: 
	https://data.neonscience.org/data-api/endpoints/taxonomy/

tolerance: tolerance for the organism of that type
	The tolerance is the tolerance to organic pollution used to calculate the Hilsenhof Biotic Index.  Most tolerance values used were
	taken from the following resources
	
	Stream Biomonitoring Unit Staff.  2012. Standard operating Procedure: Biological monitoring of surface waters in New York State.  
	New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Division of Water.  Albany, NY.
	
	Aquatic Bioassessment Laboratory. 2003. List of California macroinvertebrate taxa and standard taxonomic effort. 
	California Department of Fish and Game. Rancho Cordova, CA.
	https://www.safit.org/Docs/CABW_std_taxonomic_effort.pdf

FFG: Primary functional feeding group of that organism

	cf - filtering collector 	dominant food: filter feeders or suspension feeders that eat decomposing fine particular matter (FPOM) 
	cg - gathering collector 	dominant food: gathers or deposit feeds on decomposing fine particular matter (FPOM) (includes surface film feeders)
	om - omnivore dominant food: eats a variety of things including plant, animal, and detritus	
	prc - piercer  dominant food: eats by piercing its prey.  
	prd - predator	dominant food: eats living animal tissue.  Often ingests whole or part of another animal
	scr - scraper	 dominant food: scrapes periphyton of surfaces (periphyton = algae and associated material attached to rocks and other substrata)
	sh - shredders 	dominant food: herbivore variety chew and mines live plant material, detritivore variety chews, bores, or gouges decomposing vascular plant 	tissue including wood (course particulate organic matter = CPOM)


     

2. Missing data codes:
        Code/symbol     Definition
	NA        	Not Available
        
3. Specialized formats of other abbreviations used
dates are all given in month/day/year (mm/dd/yyyy) format in the .csv file but usually given as yyyy-mm-dd when imported in R




