This “mill.hopb_metadata” file was most recently updated on 2021-04-07 by Marney Pratt


-------------------
GENERAL INFORMATION
-------------------


1. Title of Dataset 

Mill River and Lower Hop Brook Macroinvertebrate Data for 2018-2019


2. Author Information


  Principal Investigator Contact Information
        Name: Marney Pratt
           Institution: Smith College
           Address: 44 College Ln, Northampton, MA 01063
           Email: mcpratt@smith.edu



3. Date of data collection (single date, range, approximate date) <dates in format YYYY-MM>

2018 - 2019


4. Geographic location of data collection (where was data collected?): 

Mill River in Northampton, MA  USA
GPS coordinates given below

Lower Hop Brook data from NEON - see: https://www.neonscience.org/field-sites/hopb

5. Information about funding sources that supported the collection of the Mill River data:

Smith College Facilities Management funded summary salary for Marney Pratt and 
Summer Undergradate Research Fellowships awarded to 
Sasha Clapp and Lyric Williams in 2018
Andrew Turgeon and Samikshya Dhami in 2019

The Horner Fund funded a Summer Undergradate Research Fellowship for 
Renee Halloran in 2018
Sasha Clapp in 2019

The Smith College Department of Biological Sciences funded some of the materials and supplies in 
addition to Smith College Facilities Management

--------------------------
SHARING/ACCESS INFORMATION
-------------------------- 


1. Licenses/restrictions placed on the data:
No restrictions other than proper citation/attribution


2. Recommended citation for this metadata text file:

Pratt, MC.  2021.  Mill River and Lower Hop Brook metadata for 2018-2019.  Smith College, Northampton, MA.

3. Recommended citation for the data:

Mill River data: Pratt, MC.  2021.  Mill River macroinvertebrate data for 2018-2019.  Smith College, Northampton, MA.
Lower Hop Brook Macroinvertebrate Data see: https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP1.20120.001
Lower Hop Brook Water Quality Data see: https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP1.20288.001


---------------------
DATA & FILE OVERVIEW
---------------------


1. File List
   A. Filename: mill.hopb.macro.csv       
      Short description:        

Each row shows the data from one type of organism found from a site on the same day.  The data contains all the organisms found for the 
2018-2019 sampling for both rivers.

   B. Filename: mill.hopb.waterQ.csv       
      Short description:        

Each row shows the data collected from a specific location in the Mill River at a specific time and then a matched time point taken from the sensor array deployed by NEON in the Lower Hop Brook in 2019.


--------------------------
METHODOLOGICAL INFORMATION
--------------------------


1. Description of methods used for collection/generation of data: 
<Include links or references to publications or other documentation containing experimental design or protocols used in data collection>

Mill River Methods: Investigators sampled several quadrats (usually 10) in each site on each date.  For each 50 cm x 50 cm quadrat

Aquatic macroinvertebrates were sampled from riffle habitats (areas with a rocky bottom, shallow depth, rippled water surface, and relatively fast water flow) 
by kick-sampling using D-nets (LaMotte D-net, 0.3m base opening & 500 micron mesh).  Nets were placed downstream with the opening facing upstream.  
A quadrat was placed in front of the net, the area sampled was 0.5 m x 0.5m.  


Larger rocks were picked up and any organisms found on the rocks were picked off and placed in a tub of river water.
Once all larger rocks were cleaned off and placed outside of the quadrat, the substratum was disturbed by shuffling and kicking an investigator's boots on the 
bottom of the river for 30 seconds to 1 minute making sure that the D-net caught anything disturbed by the kicking. 
The contents of the net were rinsed into the tub of water.  
This process was repeated 8-11 times per site, and all samples from a site were either joined into one composite sample (Fall 2018) or kept separate by microhabitat (Summer 2018, Fall & Summer 2019).  


In each location (upstream and downstream of Paradise Pond) we sampled 5 microhabitats.  We usually sampled 2 quadrats in each microhabitat for a total of 10 quadrats sampled in a location on a particular day.  

 
After collecting in the field, samples were taken back to the lab and sorted into categories (mostly at the order or family level) and then preserved in 
70% ethyl alcohol.  Later, each organism was identified to the lowest level possible (down to genus for most things, species for some, and higher taxonomic 
levels for some difficult to identify organisms such as worms and midges in the fall sampling times).

Note that because of heavy rains in Fall 2018, sampling was very difficult.  The 3rd downstream sample did not sample the sponge microhabitat (DSP) so there were only 8 quadrats taken for that sample, while 11 quadrats were taken in the 3rd upstream sample.


For Lower Hop Brook Macroinvertebrate Data Collection Methods see: https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP1.20120.001

For Lower Hop Brook Water Quality Data Collection Methods see: https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP1.20288.001





-----------------------------------------
DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: mill.hopb.macro.csv
-----------------------------------------


1. Variable List

siteID: Identification of the sampling river.  MILL = Mill River, HOPB = Lower Hop Brook

date: sampling date in mm/dd/yyyy format 
	dates are all given in month/day/year (mm/dd/yyyy) format in the .csv file but usually given as yyyy-mm-dd when imported in R

year: sampling year

startTime.UTC: the time in hours:minutes:seconds in the Universal Time Coordinated (UTC) time zone that sampling was started

season: sampling season (Summer or Fall)

sampleTime: sampling time. Each sampling time is a combition of the season and year, for example Fall 2018 or Summer 2019

habitatType: the type of habitat - which is riffle or pool 
samplerType: the type of sampler used to take the sample, 
	All MILL samples were taken with a D-net (LaMotte D-net, 0.3m base opening & 500 micron mesh)
	For HOPB samplers, see more information from NEON.DOC.003046vE (https://data.neonscience.org/api/v0/documents/NEON.DOC.003046vE)

		
	HOPB riffle samples were taken with a surber - "Surber sampler: Benthic sampler for flowing waters. A standard Surber sampler consists of a 30 cm x 30 cm frame and a long 243 mm Nitex mesh net that collects organisms (Figure 19)." 

	HOPB pool sampels were taken with a core - "Hand corer: Benthic sampler for sand- and silt-bottomed streams (Figure 24). Sampler consists of an inner PVC tube and an outer, stainless steel housing for pushing the corer into the substratum. The stainless steel barrel is 5 cm in diameter by 50 cm high with a handle on top."

	

sampleID: unique identification code for each sample.
	example for Mill River codes: 01URSU18.UM - first two numbers are the sample number, 
	the next two letters are for the site (UR = upstream riffle, DR = downstream riffle), 
	the next two letters are for the season (SU = summer, FA = Fall), 
	and the last two numbers are for the year (18 = 2018, 19 = 2019).  
	The letters after the period indicate the microhabitat or NA if the microhabitat is unknown

	
	See the map of each habitat for locations including the microhabitats within the sampling area where samples were taken. 		https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/112FTHi84gQDcd_78vneF7nzcgPe0D2qoUNOyF4ZxU1M/edit?usp=sharing

	DSR - Downstream slow rocky (on the far side of the river (closer to the athletic fields), just downstream of some larger rocks where the flow is 
	slower and there are some large rocks)
	DSP - Downstream sponge area (in the middle of the river, shallow, fast flow, lots of sponges present)
	DFR - Downstream fast rocky (on the far side of the river (closer to the athletic fields), just upstream of some larger rocks where the flow is faster 
	and there are some large rocks)
	DM - Downstream middle (in the middle of the river, moderate flow, just downstream of the sponge area, lots of small and medium sized rocks)
	DSH - Downstream shady (on the far side of the river (closer to the athletic fields), in a very fast flow area and very shaded because right below a 
	tree, further upstream than DFR)

	USR - Upstream slow rocky (on the close side of the river (closer to the path and the side with the retaining wall, "downstream of the bend"), 
	just downstream of some larger rocks where the flow is slower and there are some large rocks)
	UFR - Upstream fast rocky (on the close side of the river (closer to the path and the side with the retaining wall, "downstream of the bend"), 
	just upstream of some larger rocks where the flow is faster and there are some large rocks)
	UM - Upstream middle (in the middle of the river near some larger rocks, moderate flow, "downstream of the bend", lots of smallsized rocks)
	USH - Upstream shady (on the far side of the river ("upstream of the bend", further from the path we come in on), in a fast flow area and shaded 
	because right below a tree)
	USU - Upstream sunny (on the far side of the river ("upstream of the bend", further from the path we come in on), in a realtively fast flow area 
	just downstream of USH that is sunnier        


organism_aggr: the unique name for each organism aggregated for some organisms.	
	Some species are aggregated into a genus (especially a lot of the mayflies, stoneflies, and caddisflies), family (midges), or class (segmented worms)

acceptedTaxonID: the identification code for each taxon taken from NEON (https://data.neonscience.org/taxonomic-lists)

number: number of organisms of that type for that sample on that day


benthicArea: benthic area in meters squared. Calculated as the area of a 0.25 meter squared quadrat times the number of quadrats.

invDens: invertebrate density in number per meter squared. Calculated as the number of a particular organism divided by the benthic area that the organism was sampled in.

acceptedTaxonID: this is a unique identification code for each taxon based on codes from NEON: 
	https://data.neonscience.org/data-api/endpoints/taxonomy/

tolerance: tolerance for the organism of that type
	The tolerance is the tolerance to organic pollution used to calculate the Hilsenhof Biotic Index.  Most tolerance values used were
	taken from the following resources
	
	Stream Biomonitoring Unit Staff.  2012. Standard operating Procedure: Biological monitoring of surface waters in New York State.  
	New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Division of Water.  Albany, NY.
	
	Aquatic Bioassessment Laboratory. 2003. List of California macroinvertebrate taxa and standard taxonomic effort. 
	California Department of Fish and Game. Rancho Cordova, CA.
	https://www.safit.org/Docs/CABW_std_taxonomic_effort.pdf

FFG: Primary functional feeding group of that organism

	cf - filtering collector 	dominant food: filter feeders or suspension feeders that eat decomposing fine particular matter (FPOM) 
	cg - gathering collector 	dominant food: gathers or deposit feeds on decomposing fine particular matter (FPOM) (includes surface film feeders)
	om - omnivore dominant food: eats a variety of things including plant, animal, and detritus	
	prc - piercer  dominant food: eats by piercing its prey.  
	prd - predator	dominant food: eats living animal tissue.  Often ingests whole or part of another animal
	scr - scraper	 dominant food: scrapes periphyton of surfaces (periphyton = algae and associated material attached to rocks and other substrata)
	sh - shredders 	dominant food: herbivore variety chew and mines live plant material, detritivore variety chews, bores, or gouges decomposing vascular plant 	tissue including wood (course particulate organic matter = CPOM)


    
      

2. Missing data codes:
        Code/symbol     Definition
	NA        	Not Available
        
3. Specialized formats of other abbreviations used
dates are all given in month/day/year (mm/dd/yyyy) format in the .csv file but usually given as yyyy-mm-dd when imported in R


-----------------------------------------
DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: mill.hopb.waterQ.csv
-----------------------------------------


1. Variable List

siteID: Identification of the sampling river.  MILL = Mill River, HOPB = Lower Hop Brook

date: sampling date in mm/dd/yyyy format 
	dates are all given in month/day/year (mm/dd/yyyy) format in the .csv file but usually given as yyyy-mm-dd when imported in R

year: sampling year

startTime.UTC: the time in hours:minutes:seconds in the Universal Time Coordinated (UTC) time zone that sampling was started


pH: the pH 

	MILL: pH was measured using an Oakton pH Testr 50 Waterproof Pocket pH Tester (accuracy: ±0.01 pH)
	which was calibrated ahead of time using buffers made using the Vernier pH capsule set
	Effort was made to wait until the meter stabilized on a reading before the pH was recorded

	HOPB: See https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP1.20288.001 for more information
	YSI EXO pH sensor was used to continuously record pH (see https://www.ysi.com/product/id-599702/exo-ph-smart-sensor for accuracy)

DO: Dissolved oxygen was measured in milligrams of oxygen per liter 
	
	MILL: the DO was measured by the Vernier Optical Dissolved Oxygen Probe (accurate to ± 0.1 mg/L). 
	https://www.vernier.com/manuals/odo-bta/
	The reading taken just below the surface (with the probe all the way in the water at least up to the temperature sensor) and was a 10 second average. 
	The probe was calibrated using a zero oxygen solution of sodium sulfite and a 100% saturation value determined by placing the probe in the storage cap 
	with distilled water saturating the sponge (so the air was 100% saturated with water)
	Effort was made to make sure that the probe had settled on a reading before it was recorded 
	(it can take a little while for the first reading or two to settle as the temperature adjusts)

	HOPB: See https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP1.20288.001 for more information
	YSI EXO dissolved oxygen sensor was used to continuously record DO 
	(see https://www.ysi.com/product/id-599100-01/exo-optical-dissolved-oxygen-smart-sensor for accuracy)

turb: Turbidity 

	MILL: measured in Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU) by the Vernier Turbidity Sensor (accurate to ±2 NTU for readings under 25 NTU). 		https://www.vernier.com/files/manuals/trb-bta.pdf
	890 nm light detected at 90 degree angle
	Samples of water from each location were taken with a clean turbidity bottle (https://www.vernier.com/products/accessories/trb-bot/)
	Calibration was done using Millipore filtered RO water and the 100 NTU calibration bottle that came with the sensor.  
	All bottles were tipped upside down three times before a measurement was taken or calibration was performed
	Bottles were wiped clean by a Kim Wipe before the bottle was placed in the sensor.


    	HOPB: See https://data.neonscience.org/data-products/DP1.20288.001 for more information
	YSI EXO turbiditysensor was used to continuously record turbidity in Formazin Nephelometric Units (FNU)
	860 nm light detected at 90 degree angle
	(see https://www.ysi.com/product/id-599101-01/exo-turbidity-smart-sensor for accuracy)

	While the equipment used in the two rivers records in different units (NTU in MILL, FNU in HOPB), the wavelength of light used in each is very similar and both 	use an angle of 90 degrees so we will treat them as the same and use the FNU unit.
	See https://www.ysi.com/file%20library/documents/technical%20notes/t627_turbidity_units_and_calibration_solutions.pdf for a discussion of NTU vs FNU
      

2. Missing data codes:
        Code/symbol     Definition
	NA        	Not Available
        
3. Specialized formats of other abbreviations used
dates are all given in month/day/year (mm/dd/yyyy) format in the .csv file but usually given as yyyy-mm-dd when imported in R


